if you guys have washed my channel in
the past you know one of the mottos I
kind of live by here is that I try to
make videos that are not just
interesting short-term that are not just
significant if you were to watch them
today 2016 they'd still be interesting
or meaningful if you come back and watch
them five years from now 10 years now
you don't know the short-term
controversy that's going on and I try to
make them in a way so that if I myself
came back and watch them five years from
now 10 years from now they'd still be
interesting to me even though I've
forgotten about the short-term conifers
today the sense in which this backfires
is when I later want to delete a video
take it out of the few because then no
one watched you know what I look back at
that anything really no no but I talk
about some meaningful stuff here there's
some stuff you're at wanna I just wanted
to leave that don't wanna lose you know
mixed in with whatever the short-term
controversy is so the short-term
controversy I'm going to talk about in
this video alludes to guys like Joe
vegan guys like Martin Lewis guys like a
vegan cheetah but there is also more
philosophical broad question here that
I'm going to couldn't address and a more
tactical political question for the
future of veganism um okay last things
first let's let's deal with the really
meaningful stuff first then we'll come
back to whatever idiots like Joe vegan
um message I have to share today with my
fellow vegans my fellow aspiring vegan
activist people who want with the world
a better place is do not let veganism
become the next Esperanto now you may
now wonder what the hell would I mean by
that if you go to Google Image Search
and um you know you put in Esperanto
conference you may see some images of
conferences from around the world and
they may look better than they may look
more impressive than any vegan or animal
rights conference you've been to or that
you've seen images of you may think wow
Esperanto has a lot going on i remember
when i lived in cambodia they used to
have a poster up for classes they were
teaching trying to teach cambodian
people how to speak esperanto it may
seem to you like Esperanto is a
tremendously successful social movement
because it is we'll come back this in
its foundation it has social political
ass
operations it's not just just the
language but you can't lose sight of
what the original mandate and the
original objectives of Esperanto were so
I wanted to state this up front the
other thing to remember is vegans you
know we feel sorry for ourselves a lot
of the time not without reason we have
reason to feel sorry for herself no
nothing wrong with that being vegan can
be hard it's hard if you live in
Saskatchewan it's hard if you live in
Cambodia I've lived in both places I can
speak to both um but you know as much
hard work as it is to get used to being
vegan to get used to the discipline in
terms of the diet and the lifestyle yeah
how hard it is for me to buy shoes that
fit me in China and do not have leather
as a vegan yeah there are things there
are things that are hard there are
things that we feel sorry for ourselves
about and there may be the conflicts
with your family and the alienation from
your friends and the social probes yeah
there are ways in which being vegan is
hard but it's interesting to keep in
mind the obstacles involved mean vegan
are miniscule compared to the obstacles
involved in learning a language right so
that's interesting comparison Esperanto
is language Esperanto is a man-made
artificial language so the level of
investment you you have look let's say
let's say you're not that interesting
veganism let's say you're someone who
really cares about ecology you're
someone who really cares about the
environment and you want to be serious
with ecological politics so you just
look at the unisom think I guess I have
to be vegan for this reason like some
people like that some people they're
real interest is not animal rights the
real interest is not veganism it's
something else but they have to become
vegan as part and parcel of their other
aspirations in life I don't think I've
ever met anyone who admitted that to me
but it must exist them you know every
possible combination and permutation
human nature exists yeah if you were in
that situation you have to say look the
hurdles for getting involved with
ecology via veganism are not that high
you can do it you can throw out all the
cheese in your fridge you can throw out
your leather shoes you can make it work
if you want to get serious about First
Nations politics American Indian
politics indigenous peoples politics if
you have to learn a language like Navajo
that's
huge barrier if you have to learn a
language like Cree like a jib way like
mohawk I need the Iroquois way it's a
huge barrier years of incredibly hard
work in order to have any credibility to
be involved and in the past I've given
advice those who watch the channel for a
long time is given advice to other
people who are struggling with you know
their own lack of legitimacy and trying
to find a voice than veganism movement
I've given them advice talking things
look why don't you publish a children's
book why you could record a song you
could do anything positive any little
bit of activism within veganism will get
you you know the respect of and
collaboration with an interest of other
vegans and you start to get something
positive for me so it's not that hard
the barriers to entry here are not that
high they're not that difficult um but
Esperanto you know you have to look back
at the original mandate for why this
movement existed why it still exists and
Esperanto was actually founded with the
very lofty goals of world peace and the
promotion of scientific progress now you
may say oh well that's just ridiculous
nobody takes that serious oh I don't
know today maybe fewer fewer people do
takes her submitted I don't know um but
the point is Esperanto was not started
to just be a fun language like klingon
or Vulcan or elvish it wasn't supposed
to be a joke it wasn't supposed to be
used to language that people learned for
fun the concept of Esperanto was found
in Eastern Europe where there was
intense racism there still is still as a
lot of races in Eastern Europe and where
a lot of the racism did break down or
along linguistic lines at that time so
in general you know Russians heated the
Polish and Ukrainians hated the Russians
and everyone was anti-semitic there was
Andy you know so there was all kinds of
different hatred against the Jews and of
course there was a lot of hatred and
fear of the gypsies the Roma etc etc so
there were all these ethnic lines in
Eastern Europe and some of them of
course many of the borders in Eastern
Europe had changed recently and
continued to change so who was and who
wasn't polish who was and who wasn't
Estonian those things were changing
there was a lot of intense ethnic and
nationalistic a tree along ethnic lines
the other part of the background Eastern
Europe's history that you have to
remember is that
latin formerly had tremendous political
and social significance there was one of
the parts of the world where Latin was
really really important so Esperanto was
both trying to replace Latin in terms of
the progress of civilization progress of
science providing a lingua franca as we
say for educated minds to exchange their
views with in Eastern Europe organic
made sense and it was also supposed to
help bring about world peace supposed to
overcome racism and that's amazing
invidious hatred and it isn't
interesting I mean if you think
conceptually about an alternative
history just for Eastern Europe well if
Esperanto had succeeded than Esperanto
would in places like Poland and the
Ukraine Ukraine where there is currently
a war 2016 as an intense war being
fought in eastern Ukraine with very real
body count variable costs in terms of
millions of dollars etc etc you can
imagine that Esperanto might have really
provided an alternative to Russian and
English and today those are the lingua
franca they're the dominant language
with the options you've got for
communicating across those boundaries
those barriers the barriers between
Ukrainian and polish between I guess you
know Jews and anti-semitic people with
the the Roma and what have you so
Esperanto it wasn't a ridiculous idea at
the start but you got you got mission
creep right if that was the point of
Esperanto world peace the progress of
science a new lingua franca at what
point do you recognize this is a failure
the people I've met and spoken to
cleaners people over the internet who
defended Esperanto defended in the
following terms oh well you know when
you go on vacation in Western Europe if
you know Esperanto you can meet people
you know like through couchsurfing and
other websites you can meet people who
will meet up with you and have a beer
and people who will let you stay at
their house like you know it's this
social networking thing it's not the
point it's not point of Esperanto right
the point is not for it to be like
Klingon or elvish is not for it to be a
hobby right and if you've already given
up all of those goals all those
objectives if you're at that point where
you've sacrificed the entire mission and
mandate of Esperanto and
it's just something cool and funny that
you can do over social media it's not
just become meaningless it's worse than
meaningless right because you're asking
people to sacrifice hundreds of hours of
their lives for something's really worse
than nothing I have you might you might
as well learn going on at that point um
this happens in veganism two and half as
veganism in a short span of time you
know there's a guy who's channel i can
still shout out I I shouted it out when
nobody had heard of it I showed it and
promoted a guy called vegan mojo when
nobody heard him when he had only ten
viewers because his channel it just
started I had a couple videos up I can
still promoted next last time I checked
he was only getting like 200 views per
video on his more recent videos which is
you know said but for me one of the
distinctive things about vegan mojo you
know whatever you can criticize him
everyone's nobody's perfect everyone's
deserving criticism but you know in his
early video something he said so clearly
and I heard him say it again lately is
that his objective is to create a vegan
world you know of course there are a
million ways to phrase it I'm not saying
that's the best but doesn't matter a
million ways to phrase it but he would
criticize other forms of activism things
like direct action everywhere date
different forms of street protests
different forms of extremism and
different digital vegan activist on
YouTube people like freelee the banana
girl he would criticize musim is this
going to contribute to our goal or
long-term goal or mandate of bringing
about a vegan world and there I mean you
know that kind of question ok so is
Esperanto the way to create world peace
or the progress of science are both
because they were packaged together at
one time is Esperanto the way to pursue
world peace today in the Ukraine today
in Poland today in Cambodia so I
actually seen it promoted in Cambodia if
not we got to change our plans we got to
think strategically glad I think
tactically we got everything this whole
project and otherwise it becomes a joke
right with veganism similarly if you do
not have some clear mandate of that kind
for what you're doing even if you're
making comedy videos even if you're
making music videos you know you have to
question it or you have to change that
because or you even have to
we identify what is your doing maybe you
gotta stop being vegan first and
foremost and join an ecological movement
or human rights based movement or some
other potent I don't know the most
fundamental problem I have with these
other channels like Joe vegan and lately
vegan cheetah maybe he'll change I think
they really do lose that mission and
mandate they lose that sense of why
they're doing this or why any of this
matters you know like Esperanto veganism
ends up becoming this meaningless hobby
that just happens to be why people are
brought together on the Internet why
people happen to be connected by these
social networks and that becomes a
platform for some pretty meaningless
content now yes there's money involved
yes there's popularity involved yes
there is sexuality involved I mean vegan
cheetah and NGO vegan something else
they have in common is they both by
their own description of very low levels
of education I mean this is from you
know this stuff in their videos
obviously they're both guys have talked
to to some extent but you know Joe vegan
openly talks with the fact that he never
had a chance to go to university
etcetera etc now look um okay let's take
the books out of the shot here um there
are a lot of things you can get out of
an education I'm not here talking about
some kind of elite the Science Center
notion of education one of the things I
really learnt and saw through formal
education but you could get it
informally you could get it by hanging
out at a comedy club you know I did
actually spend my time around actors and
playwrights and artists and sculptors
and one of the core concepts you get out
of having an education in the arts which
neither these guys have like you know
Joe vegan doesn't have it cheetah
doesn't have it some like Martin Luther
said they do not have an education in
the arts you know pandering to your
audience is not morally neutral it's not
the default mode of behavior it's
actually something horrible joerger [ __ ]
had something bad in the earth and you
understand that the fact that this is
what your audience wants to hear isn't a
justification for anything it's the
opposite if you're an artist the whole
point is to understand
what it is your audience wants to hear
and then to subvert that and challenge
that expectation to use that as raw
material to make something original and
brilliant and surprising and challenging
so people like Joe vegan I might as well
you're still Jovians the example when
they tell me oh well look man you know
I'm sorry I say this to my audience but
this is an audience once the air from
from his perspective that really is a
complete explanation of justification
and from minus the exact opposite if
your audience wants to hear that my
court case is a scam and now you're
willing to fabricate evidence and ignore
the evidence I provide you and just you
know avoid talking to me so that you can
elaborate this myth rather than deal
with reality and again we're not just
saying what comedy resemble what he's
factually speaking for himself and so
this isn't just you know a poor
justification is this him actually in
daiting himself from my perspective from
every start it's like okay so you don't
understand what this game is about at
all if you're going to tell me that you
don't your excuse for this is that your
parents when Joe vegan insults me and my
experience University which did hurt me
which did bug that I told him that
openly and his justifications oh well
this is what people want here and again
he wasn't doing this in a comedy video
it's like dude you you don't understand
the game and you don't understand what
what winning and losing it's like in
this game now look one of the things I'm
notorious for is that I tell people
after they've proven to me that they're
idiots after they've proven to me that
they're incompetent after they prove to
me that they have malice after they've
proven to me they're dishonest with me
which all of this is true jovian by the
way after they've proven to me that
they're never going to do anything
positive for veganism the future or
that's my expectation if they surprised
me that's great is that I tell them look
I'm never going to talk to you again so
a number of youtubers have complained
about this you should be asking the
exact opposite question if you're on
social media if your micro famous
doesn't matter you have 500 viewers
doesn't matter if you have 500 viewers
you still don't have time to talk to 50
of them you're still making a choice who
is worth your time who are you going to
communicate with who are you going to
collaborate with if you have just 500
followers or fans or viewers whatever
you want to say you're still making that
choice all the time we going to shut
down
are you going to bring on for your
podcast you're going to interview who
are you going to even write email to
it's still quite decision you make every
day no matter how tiny your your level
of microfilm is the question is not why
would I tell these people and if you
fall in channel you know exam why would
I tell these people never talking to you
again the question is why did I ever
talk to them okay I always knew Joe
vegan was an idiot I always knew vegan
cheetah wasn't it yet and most of the
chant most of the videos i had on vegan
sheet are now unlisted from this channel
their unlisted or deleted because i
don't want to promote the guy but I had
him on we did podcast together we did
video interviews together I made videos
responding to the fact that people
accused him of being racist and
homophobic and you look it was never a
mystery to me that that guy was an idiot
right any of these people that a lot of
the people I make the time to
communicate with I know are idiots all
right the question isn't why at some
point when they proven to me that they
have malice and said or why did I cut
them let's not quick questions why did I
ever get the chance why did I ever put
in the time and i'll tell you why right
now it's something called generosity of
spirit generosity of spirit I mean you
know it's out of fashion to speak this
way I'm an atheist I'm not a number of
any religion I don't think of these as
religious values okay generosity of
spirit means I don't judge you by who
you are I don't judge you about what
you've done in the past I don't judge
you as good and evil I judge you in
terms of your potential to do something
positive in the future that's as
generous as I can possibly be when I
first met vegan cheetah he had fewer
viewers than I had which is amazing i
have a small channel talk about
specialized topics were specialized i'm
not going for a mass audience he was
getting fewer viewers that i got even
though he was already a bodybuilder and
he had all the photos up of him with his
shirt off and he was doing all kinds of
crazy editing stuff but i had a bigger
audience than need it so it was no
self-promotion in that why would i make
the time to talk to someone who was
already known ex-convict you know
long-term drug addict in and out of
rehab obviously an idiot obviously you
know someone who
engages and dishonest trolling to try to
get attention you know even back then
he'd done that kind of stuff why would I
engage with some of that because of this
fundamental generosity of spirit I'm
it's what I meet people I say I'm not
going to judge you about who you are i'm
not going to even judge you about what
you're doing now not about what you've
done in the past now what you're doing
now i am going to judge you by your
potential to do something positive in
the future and that's why I reach out
all these people I've reached out to
vegan Ava there is no doubt in anyone's
mind that she's a [ __ ] that she's
dishonest that she acts with malice that
she's acted with malice towards myself
personally saying unforgivable things
about me and my family and my daughter
and my divorce my personal life and of
course about my legal case all right I
have even reached out to her positively
because even she has some potential to
do something positive in the future so
that's the standard I use when I reach
out to people and my standard is low
alright so that's why I made the effort
with people like Joe with people like
cheetah whatever but at some point you
know with each of these people I've
reached out to and I can mention others
and I know I'm infamous for this phrase
I'm never going to talk to you again but
that's the truth that's the Cole you
make basically at some point they drop
below the threshold where me talking to
you is a waste of my time compared to me
talking to a complete stranger on the
Internet including you know any of the
people who are currently in the chat i'm
recording this with live chat going on
right that's the end you know what some
positive things come from talking to
complete strangers in the internet of
this one a complete stranger I've now
been talking for about two months a
vegan don't have that much in common
have sense of humor in common find each
other's jokes funny that human I don't
know anything about this person but you
know ok I think you've got some
potential to make something positive
happen in the future and you know we
tend to think of ethics and morality in
terms of what's selfish versus what's
selfless but this is beyond that concept
of good and evil this is not about that
it's about your potential to do good in
the
future being more important than your
real record of doing harm in the past